README.md, before:

# Cachearium

Cache in your PHP applications. Fast, simple and with easy invalidation.

# Installation

## Composer

Add this to your composer.json:

TODO

## Manual

- Download the package
- Include `require_once('Cached.php');`

# Use cases/examples

## Store a single value and invalidate it

This is basic storage.

```
$data = 'xxxx';

// store
$cache = Cache::factory('your backend');
$cache->store($data, new CacheKey('Namespace', 'Subname'));

// get it later
try { 
	$data2 = $cache->get(new CacheKey('Namespace', 'Subname'));
	// $data2 == 'xxxx';
}
catch (NotCachedException($e)) {
	// handle not cached
}

// store new value with automatic invalidation
$data = 'yyy';
$cache->store($data, new CacheKey('Namespace', 'Subname'));
```

## Store using CacheData

CacheData provides a more sophisticated class to store values.


```
$data = 'xxxx';

// store
$cache = Cache::factory('your backend');
$cache->storeData(new CacheData($data, new CacheKey('Namespace', 'Subname')));

// get it later
try { 
	$data2 = $cache->getData(new CacheKey('Namespace', 'Subname'));
	// $data2->getFirstData() == 'xxxxx'
}
catch (NotCachedException($e)) {
	// handle not cached
}

// store new value with automatic invalidation
$data = 'yyy';
$cache->storeData((new CacheData($data, new CacheKey('Namespace', 'Subname'));
```

## Store a value with multiple dependencies

You can have multiple dependencies so you can invalidate all cache data that
relate to a certain key.  

```
$cache = Cache::factory('your backend');

// create a storage key and bucket
$key = new CacheKey('Namespace', 'Subname');
$cd = new CacheData($data, $key);

// add dependencies. setDependencies will generate immediately, avoiding races.
// otherwise you find results, the DB changes in another process and you get a
// stale dependency. note that addDependencies does not do that, leaving the
// hash to be calculated later
$dep = new CacheKey('Namespace', 'SomeDep');
$cd->setDependencies([$dep]);

// store.
$data = 'xxxx';
$cache->storeData($cd);

// at this point $cache->get($key) will return your data

// invalidate a dependency. This will be called on your write method.
$cache->invalidate($dep);

// at this point $cache->get($key) will throw an NotCachedException
```

### Example: Store searches and invalidate them when an attribute is written to

```
function someSearch() {
	$key = new CacheKey('search', 'someSearch'); // keys for this data
	$cache = Cache::factory('backend');
	try {
		return $cache->get($key); // TODO
	}
	catch (NotCachedException($e)) {
		// handle not cached below
	}

	$searchdata = getSomeData(); // results of some horrible slow query

	// attributes that are used in this search
	$dependencies = [
		new CacheKey('attribute', 'name'), 
		new CacheKey('attribute', 'description')
		new CacheKey('attribute', 'cost')
	];
	
	// create cache data
	$cd = 
	$cache->storeData(
		(new CacheData($searchdata, $key))
		->setDependencies($dependencies);
	);
	
	return $searchdata;
}

function writeSomeStuff() {
	// changed or added some attribute value in some object

	$cache = Cache::factory('backend');
	$cache->invalidate(new CacheKey('attribute', 'name')); // invalidates any cache that depends on this key
}
```

## Cache associated with an object/model that you can easily clean

It's likely that you have a MVC application. Model classes can easily cache data

```
class Foo extends Model {
	use Cached;
	
	/**
	 * Unique object id in your application (primary key)
	 */
	public function getId() {
		return $this->id;	
	}
	
	public function cacheClean() {
		$cache = Cache::factory('backend');
		$cache->clean('Foo', $this->getId());
	}
	
	public function save() {
		// save stuff on db
		$this->cacheClean(); // clear any cache associated with this item
	}

	public function cacheStore($data, $key) {
		$cache = Cache::factory('backend');
		return $cache->save($data, 'Foo', $this->getId(), $key);
	}

	public function cacheGet($key) {
		$cache = Cache::factory('backend');
		return $cache->get('Foo', $this->getId(), $key);
	}
}
```

## Nested cache for contents. Useful for generating HTML made of fragments

This uses the russian doll approach to bubble up any invalidations. This means that
if you have a list of items and you change one of them, you only invalidate its own
cache entry and the entry for the whole list. You can regenerate the list with a 
single DB hit. 

```
$cache = Cache::factory('your backend');

$cache->start(new CacheKey('main'));

	$cache->start(new CacheKey('header'));
	$cache->end();
	
	foreach ($somestuff as $stuff) {
		$stuff->render();
	}

	$cache->start(new CacheKey('footer'));
		
	$cache->end();
$cache->end();

class Stuff {
	public function getCacheKey() {
		return new CacheKey('stuff', $this->getId());
	}
	
	public function write() {
		write_some_stuff();

		$cache = Cache::factory('your backend');
		$cache->clean($this->getCacheKey());
	}

	public function render() {
		$cache = Cache::factory('your backend');
		$cache->start($stuff->getCacheKey()->setSub('render'));

		$html = '<p>some html here</p>';

		// other dependency if you have it
		$cache->addDependency($otherstuff->getCacheKey()); 
		
		$cache->end();
	}
}
```

## Cache with a variable fragment
This is how to handle something such as a site header, that is almost completely the
same except for a small part that varies for each user.


# Backends

## Null

Does nothing. You can use it to turn off your caching for tests.

## RAM

Caches in RAM, for the duration of the request only. Useful for quick caches that
should not persist between requests.

## Memcache

Uses Memcache as a backend, and stores data in RAM temporarily to avoid repeated
requests in the same run.

## Filyesystem

Stores in the filesystem.

Commit message:

README with travis build status

README.md, after:

[![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/Corollarium/cachearium.svg)](https://travis-ci.org/Corollarium/cachearium)

# Cachearium

Cache in your PHP applications. Fast, simple and with easy invalidation.

# Installation

## Composer

Add this to your composer.json:

TODO

## Manual

- Download the package
- Include `require_once('Cached.php');`

# Use cases/examples

## Store a single value and invalidate it

This is basic storage.

```
$data = 'xxxx';

// store
$cache = Cache::factory('your backend');
$cache->store($data, new CacheKey('Namespace', 'Subname'));

// get it later
try { 
	$data2 = $cache->get(new CacheKey('Namespace', 'Subname'));
	// $data2 == 'xxxx';
}
catch (NotCachedException($e)) {
	// handle not cached
}

// store new value with automatic invalidation
$data = 'yyy';
$cache->store($data, new CacheKey('Namespace', 'Subname'));
```

## Store using CacheData

CacheData provides a more sophisticated class to store values.


```
$data = 'xxxx';

// store
$cache = Cache::factory('your backend');
$cache->storeData(new CacheData($data, new CacheKey('Namespace', 'Subname')));

// get it later
try { 
	$data2 = $cache->getData(new CacheKey('Namespace', 'Subname'));
	// $data2->getFirstData() == 'xxxxx'
}
catch (NotCachedException($e)) {
	// handle not cached
}

// store new value with automatic invalidation
$data = 'yyy';
$cache->storeData((new CacheData($data, new CacheKey('Namespace', 'Subname'));
```

## Store a value with multiple dependencies

You can have multiple dependencies so you can invalidate all cache data that
relate to a certain key.  

```
$cache = Cache::factory('your backend');

// create a storage key and bucket
$key = new CacheKey('Namespace', 'Subname');
$cd = new CacheData($data, $key);

// add dependencies. setDependencies will generate immediately, avoiding races.
// otherwise you find results, the DB changes in another process and you get a
// stale dependency. note that addDependencies does not do that, leaving the
// hash to be calculated later
$dep = new CacheKey('Namespace', 'SomeDep');
$cd->setDependencies([$dep]);

// store.
$data = 'xxxx';
$cache->storeData($cd);

// at this point $cache->get($key) will return your data

// invalidate a dependency. This will be called on your write method.
$cache->invalidate($dep);

// at this point $cache->get($key) will throw an NotCachedException
```

### Example: Store searches and invalidate them when an attribute is written to

```
function someSearch() {
	$key = new CacheKey('search', 'someSearch'); // keys for this data
	$cache = Cache::factory('backend');
	try {
		return $cache->get($key); // TODO
	}
	catch (NotCachedException($e)) {
		// handle not cached below
	}

	$searchdata = getSomeData(); // results of some horrible slow query

	// attributes that are used in this search
	$dependencies = [
		new CacheKey('attribute', 'name'), 
		new CacheKey('attribute', 'description')
		new CacheKey('attribute', 'cost')
	];
	
	// create cache data
	$cd = 
	$cache->storeData(
		(new CacheData($searchdata, $key))
		->setDependencies($dependencies);
	);
	
	return $searchdata;
}

function writeSomeStuff() {
	// changed or added some attribute value in some object

	$cache = Cache::factory('backend');
	$cache->invalidate(new CacheKey('attribute', 'name')); // invalidates any cache that depends on this key
}
```

## Cache associated with an object/model that you can easily clean

It's likely that you have a MVC application. Model classes can easily cache data

```
class Foo extends Model {
	use Cached;
	
	/**
	 * Unique object id in your application (primary key)
	 */
	public function getId() {
		return $this->id;	
	}
	
	public function cacheClean() {
		$cache = Cache::factory('backend');
		$cache->clean('Foo', $this->getId());
	}
	
	public function save() {
		// save stuff on db
		$this->cacheClean(); // clear any cache associated with this item
	}

	public function cacheStore($data, $key) {
		$cache = Cache::factory('backend');
		return $cache->save($data, 'Foo', $this->getId(), $key);
	}

	public function cacheGet($key) {
		$cache = Cache::factory('backend');
		return $cache->get('Foo', $this->getId(), $key);
	}
}
```

## Nested cache for contents. Useful for generating HTML made of fragments

This uses the russian doll approach to bubble up any invalidations. This means that
if you have a list of items and you change one of them, you only invalidate its own
cache entry and the entry for the whole list. You can regenerate the list with a 
single DB hit. 

```
$cache = Cache::factory('your backend');

$cache->start(new CacheKey('main'));

	$cache->start(new CacheKey('header'));
	$cache->end();
	
	foreach ($somestuff as $stuff) {
		$stuff->render();
	}

	$cache->start(new CacheKey('footer'));
		
	$cache->end();
$cache->end();

class Stuff {
	public function getCacheKey() {
		return new CacheKey('stuff', $this->getId());
	}
	
	public function write() {
		write_some_stuff();

		$cache = Cache::factory('your backend');
		$cache->clean($this->getCacheKey());
	}

	public function render() {
		$cache = Cache::factory('your backend');
		$cache->start($stuff->getCacheKey()->setSub('render'));

		$html = '<p>some html here</p>';

		// other dependency if you have it
		$cache->addDependency($otherstuff->getCacheKey()); 
		
		$cache->end();
	}
}
```

## Cache with a variable fragment
This is how to handle something such as a site header, that is almost completely the
same except for a small part that varies for each user.


# Backends

## Null

Does nothing. You can use it to turn off your caches for tests without changing
any code calls.

## RAM

Caches in RAM, for the duration of the request only. Useful for quick caches that
should not persist between requests.

## Memcache

Uses Memcache as a backend, and stores data in RAM temporarily to avoid repeated
requests in the same run.

## Filesystem

Stores in the filesystem.
